How tos - DOC-314 (#472)
matter-labs/zksync-web-era-docs: docs/dev/how-to/send-transaction-l1-l2.md

## Common use cases

Along with zkSync Era's built-in censorship resistance that requires multi-layer interoperability, there are some common use cases that need L1 to L2 transaction functionality, such as:

- Custom bridges.
- Multi-layer governing smart contracts.

## Step-by-step

1. Import the zkSync Era library or contract containing the required functionality. 

    The import gives access to the [`IZkSync.sol`](https://github.com/matter-labs/v2-testnet-contracts/blob/b8449bf9c819098cc8bfee0549ff5094456be51d/l1/contracts/zksync/interfaces/IZkSync.sol#L4) inherited interfaces that include the gas estimation functionality.

    Import the contracts with yarn (recommended), or [download the contracts](https://github.com/matter-labs/v2-testnet-contracts) from the repo.

    ::: code-tabs
    @tab yarn
    ```yarn
    yarn add -D @matterlabs/zksync-contracts
    ```
    :::

2. Get the current L1 gas price with Ethereum JSON-RPC method [`eth_gasPrice`](https://ethereum.github.io/execution-apis/api-documentation/).

    ::: code-tabs
    @tab TypeScript
    ```ts
    // Method available on a zkSync Era JS SDK Provider object

>     override async getGasPrice(token?: Address): Promise<BigNumber> {

Reviewer: The zkSync Era JS SDK should not be used to obtain the gas price on L1. The gas price on L1 should be obtained via ethers.js SDK

Author: updated

    The method returns the amount of gas required for the transaction to succeed. 

    :::tip Important
    This value is often referred to as **limit, or gas limit, or L2 gas limit** in our documented examples. 
    :::

    ::: code-tabs
    @tab TypeScript
    ```ts
    // available on a zkSync Era JS SDK Provider object
    async estimateGasL1(transaction: utils.Deferrable<TransactionRequest>): Promise<BigNumber> {
        await this.getNetwork();
        const params = await utils.resolveProperties({
            transaction: this._getTransactionRequest(transaction)
        });
        if (transaction.customData != null) {
            // @ts-ignore
            params.transaction.customData = transaction.customData;
        }
        const result = await this.send('zks_estimateGasL1ToL2', [
            Provider.hexlifyTransaction(params.transaction, { from: true })
        ]);
        try {
            return BigNumber.from(result);
        } catch (error) {
            throw new Error(`bad result from backend (zks_estimateGasL1ToL2): ${result}`);
        }
    }
    ```
    :::

>     3.1 Apply an alias to the addresses in the request if the sender address is a contract. 

Reviewer: the alias should be applied to the address of the sender before the estimation is done (i.e. the steps 3.1 and 3.0 should be swapped)

Author: moved around and renumbered

    ```ts
    // Initiate L2 transfer via L1 and execute from zkSync Era wallet (or signer object)
    const executeTx = await wallet.requestExecute({
        calldata,
        l2GasLimit: gasLimit,
        gasPerPubdataByte,
        contractAddress: L2_CONTRACT_ADDRESS,
        overrides: {
            gasPrice,
            value: txCostPrice,
        },
    });
    ```
    :::

    :::tip Solidity parameters description
    - `_contractL2`: L2 address of the contract to be called.
    - `_l2Value`: Amount of ETH to pass with the call to L2; used as `msg.value` for the transaction.
    - `_calldata`: Calldata of the transaction call; encoded the same way as in Ethereum.
    - `_l2GasLimit`: Gas limit of the transaction call obtained in step 3 above.
    - `_l2GasPerPubdataByteLimit`: Constant described in step 4 above.
    - `_factoryDeps`: Bytecodes array containing the bytecode of the contract being deployed. If the contract is a factory contract, the array contains the bytecodes of the contracts it can deploy.
    - `_refundRecipient`: Address that receives the rest of the fee after the transaction execution. If `refundRecipient == 0`, L2 `msg.sender` is used. 

>     **Note**: If the `_refundRecipient` is a smart contract, then during the L1 to L2 transaction the `msg.sender` address is [aliased](#aliasing). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **Note**: If the `_refundRecipient` is a smart contract, then during the L1 to L2 transaction its address is [aliased](#aliasing). 
```

  const msg = await contract.greet();

  console.log(`Message in contract is ${msg}`);

  const message = `Updated at ${new Date().toUTCString()}`;

  const tx = await contract.populateTransaction.setGreeting(message);

  // call to RPC method zks_estimateGasL1ToL2 to estimate L2 gas limit
  const l2GasLimt = await l2provider.estimateGasL1(tx);

  console.log(`L2 gasLimit ${l2GasLimt.toString()}`);

  const baseCost = await wallet.getBaseCost({
    // L2 computation
    gasLimit: l2GasLimt,
    // L1 gas price
    gasPrice: l1GasPrice,
  });

  console.log(
    `Executing this transaction will cost ${ethers.utils.formatEther(
      baseCost
    )} ETH`
  );

  const iface = new ethers.utils.Interface(ABI);
  const calldata = iface.encodeFunctionData("setGreeting", [message]);

  const txReceipt = await wallet.requestExecute({
    contractAddress: L2_CONTRACT_ADDRESS,
    calldata,
    l2GasLimit: l2GasLimt,
    refundRecipient: wallet.address,
    overrides: {
      // send the required amount of ETH
      value: baseCost,
      gasPrice: l1GasPrice,
    },
  });

  console.log("L1 tx hash is :>> ", txReceipt.hash);

>   txReceipt.wait();

Reviewer: maybe makes sense to show the result on the L2 (I mean how the greeting has changed)

Reviewer: okay

        return this._providerL2().getPriorityOpResponse(await this._signerL1().sendTransaction(requestExecuteTx));
    }
    ```
    :::

    :::info 
    - The `calldata` format is a bytestream containing the contract address and the method call data. 
    - The contract ABI is required to set up the calldata for sending.
    - See the [cross chain governance tutorial implementation](../tutorials/cross-chain-tutorial.md#call-l2-contract-from-l1) for further clarification.
    :::

### Example code

TODO:

## Step-by-step with gas estimation

1. Import the zkSync Era library or contract containing the required functionality. 

    The import gives access to the [`IZkSync.sol`](https://github.com/matter-labs/v2-testnet-contracts/blob/b8449bf9c819098cc8bfee0549ff5094456be51d/l1/contracts/zksync/interfaces/IZkSync.sol#L4) inherited interfaces that include the gas estimation functionality.

    Import the contracts with yarn (recommended), or [download the contracts](https://github.com/matter-labs/v2-testnet-contracts) from the repo.

    ::: code-tabs
    @tab yarn
    ```yarn
    yarn add -D @matterlabs/zksync-contracts
    ```
    :::

> 2. Get the current L1 gas price. Function available in [Yul](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-system-contracts/blob/4e0487b940fa76d26107ca725d65e7abb6d0dee8/bootloader/bootloader.yul#L1069) and then called by the [JavaScript SDK](https://github.com/matter-labs/zksync-era/blob/48fe6e27110c1fe1a438c5375fb256890e8017b1/sdk/zksync-web3.js/src/provider.ts#L265).

Reviewer: You can not estimate gas in L1. 

If you need to get the current gas price on L1, users should use `tx.gasprice` which is built-in in Solidity. The snippet that is shown here is part of the bootloader, which is the entry point for the VM. Users should not use snippets from there as there not relevant here

Author: thanks, can you supply a link to the Solidity function please @StanislavBreadless ?

Author: @barakshani ?

Reviewer 2: ?

Author: All input welcome, if you have a link to the Solidity function that would be very helpful.

Reviewer: @kailash-manasarovar sorry, most likely I don't understand what you mean, `tx.gasprice` is just a built-in function in Solidity, if a link is needed, it can be found with Google

Author: I have resolved the confusion myself. Please check.

Author: this should be ok now, please check and resolve @StanislavBreadless

        } catch (error) {
            throw new Error(`bad result from backend (zks_estimateGasL1ToL2): ${result}`);
        }
    }
    ```
    :::

    3.1 Apply an alias to the addresses in the request if the sender address is a contract. 
    
    If the sender is an EOA, no aliasing is required. Aliasing is implemented by the [`applyL1ToL2Alias`](https://github.com/matter-labs/zksync-2-contracts/blob/7b5c094a57c0606785ea38c9c752f9def9a5ed9d/ethereum/contracts/vendor/AddressAliasHelper.sol#L28) Solidity function and called by the [JavaScript SDK](https://github.com/matter-labs/zksync-era/blob/48fe6e27110c1fe1a438c5375fb256890e8017b1/sdk/zksync-web3.js/src/utils.ts#L374).

    ::: code-tabs
    @tab Solidity
    ```solidity
    function applyL1ToL2Alias(address l1Address) internal pure returns (address l2Address) {
        unchecked {
            l2Address = address(uint160(l1Address) + offset);
        }
    }
    ```
    @tab TypeScript
    ```ts
    export function applyL1ToL2Alias(address: string): string {
        return ethers.utils.hexlify(ethers.BigNumber.from(address).add(L1_TO_L2_ALIAS_OFFSET).mod(ADDRESS_MODULO));
    }
    ```
    :::

> 4. Get the base cost by calling the [`l2TransactionBaseCost`]((https://github.com/matter-labs/v2-testnet-contracts/blob/b8449bf9c819098cc8bfee0549ff5094456be51d/l1/contracts/zksync/interfaces/IMailbox.sol#L129) ) function with:

Reviewer: are you sure that double parentheses `((` render well here?

Author: thx for picking up

# Send an L1 to L2 transaction

The [zkSync Era smart contracts](https://github.com/matter-labs/zksync-2-contracts/tree/main/ethereum/contracts/zksync) allow the sender to request transactions on Ethereum L1 and pass data to zkSync Era L2.

## Common use cases

Along with zkSync Era's built-in censorship resistance that requires multi-layer interoperability, there are some common use cases that need L1 to L2 transaction functionality, such as:

- Custom bridges.
- Multi-layer governing smart contracts.

> - And more.

Reviewer 2: ??
